proposing a new release process (#580)
falcosecurity/libs: release.md

Commonly, we plan a release process when needed by [Falco](https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco). In such cases, we usually release both drivers and libs versions simultaneously. Other releases may occur for hotfixes or at the discretion of maintainers. Releases are mainly used to signal points in time where the source code is assumed to be consistent and stable.

Releases are planned using [GitHub milestones](https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/milestones). The due date indicate when consumers should expected a tagged release.

Completed releases are denoted by a _git tag_ and a corresponding [GitHub release](https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/releases).

## Release team

The release team consists of a *release manager* and other contributors from the community. Usually, we seek volunteers during our [community calls](https://github.com/falcosecurity/community#community-calls) or in the [#falco channel on Slack](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/falco), and then decide together the release planning.

> The release manager's responsibility is to coordinate the release process and track its progress. 

Author: ```suggestion
The release manager's responsibility is to coordinate the release process. The release manager will create a GitHub issue to track the progress and announce the [release phases](#release-phases).
```

Minor improvement. cc @Andreagit97

## Release team

The release team consists of a *release manager* and other contributors from the community. Usually, we seek volunteers during our [community calls](https://github.com/falcosecurity/community#community-calls) or in the #falco channel in slack](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/falco), and then decide together the release planning.

The release manager's responsibility is to coordinate the release process and track its progress. 

Note that the release manager does not need to be a maintainer. However, two [maintainers](https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/blob/master/OWNERS) with repository rights must be part of the team to approve PRs, do the git tags, manage GitHub milestones, etc.

## Release Phases

Regardless if it is a driver or a libs release when initiating a new release, we follow a streamlined process inspired by the [Kubernetes Release Phases](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release_phases.md).

![release-process-overview](docs/img/release-process.svg "Code Freeze to Thaw")

### Preparation

In the preparation phase, all enhancements expected to go into the release should be merged before the code freeze.

> When close to the code freeze starting period, maintainers should evaluate which PRs can't be merged in time and eventually postpone them to the subsequent milestone.

Reviewer: @leogr perhaps adjust to `Approximately 4 weeks prior to the freeze starting period, maintainers evaluate pending features and determine which features shall be integrated into the upcoming release based on a set of criteria`.

Outline criteria as bullet list. What comes to mind could be:

- Amount of user-facing changes
- Non user-facing changes that can affect resource utilization (CPU, memory usage ...)
- Amount of testing required to ensure stability and safety
- Type of feature (nice-to-have refactor vs adds significant new threat detection capabilities or improves stability or performance)
- Important bug fix

Author: That's a good point. I'm unsure about the criteria set, but in general, I agree with your suggestion. :+1: 

@falcosecurity/libs-maintainers wdyt?

Reviewer: Maybe start with any set of criteria that makes sense now and iterate on it. Just the fact of writing down a set of criteria is a huge win in terms of transparency.

Author: done, though still a WIP

It's recommended to start the preparation phase ~4 weeks before the release due date. 

### Code freeze

> Code freeze happens ~1 week before the release due date, and should last no more than ~5 days. Shorter freeze period are encouraged.

Reviewer 2: Just a small correction: most of the time there is no bug in the program; it is just that the verifier algorithm changes or, even better, the bytecode emitted by clang changes. 
Mixing them up, basically from time to times verifier rejects a perfectly reasonable and working code :)

> Code freeze happens ~1 week before the release due date, and should last no more than ~5 days. Shorter freeze period are encouraged.

Author: The freeze period is mainly intended precisely for that purpose. Ideally, if we had a complete automated testing solution, the second half of the freezing period would have lasted exactly the time needed to run the testing on the CI. :smile_cat:

> Code freeze happens ~1 week before the release due date, and should last no more than ~5 days. Shorter freeze period are encouraged.

Reviewer: @FedeDP thanks for this addition 😅 , so in summary we have seen:
- eBPF verifier can let a buggy program pass
- eBPF verifier can reject a perfectly fine code
- Sometimes rather the clang version used causes any of the above than the eBPF verifier algorithm being the culprit

@leogr 😄 exactly, nothing less we are asking for ...

At this point, no new-feature PRs are allowed to be merged.

[Versioning](#versioning) rules must be double-checked and eventually enforced at this stage.

### Release branch

During the code freeze period, a *release branch* (e.g., `release-x.y.z`) is created once the [release team](#release-team) ensures the code is in a good shape and reasonably no bugs are detected.

The release branch name must include the release version. If the process consists of both drivers and libs releases, the libs one is used.

In this phase:

 - A PR must be opened in our [test-infra](https://github.com/falcosecurity/test-infra/blob/master/config/config.yaml) repository to set the newly created branch as protected.

 - A release candidate tag should be created in the release branch for testing purposes.

>  - Accurate testing is performed on the release candidate. It's highly recommended to use Falco as a consumer when testing libs and drivers.

Author: Yes, I agree, but I think it should be a separate document.
And we don't have it yet. Is anyone willing to help? :sweat_smile:

>  - Accurate testing is performed on the release candidate. It's highly recommended to use Falco as a consumer when testing libs and drivers.

Reviewer: "CI powered testing steps and criteria for passing each steps are outlined in [TBA doc]". I can sign up for helping create that doc (and tag maintainers accordingly for review and clarifications). 

v1 could be summarizing current CI as well as describing the near-term (<1 yr out) "north star" plans.
v2 then corrects the "north star" plans and describes the actual extended test battery.

>  - Accurate testing is performed on the release candidate. It's highly recommended to use Falco as a consumer when testing libs and drivers.

Author: done!

>  - If necessary, bug fixing or testing PRs can be merged on the `master` branch. In such a case, relevant commits are cherry-picked and ported to the release branch and a new release candidate is created.

Reviewer: Similarly can `if necessary` be quantified?

Author: How? :smile_cat: 

I believe it's implicit for bug fixing (if one discovers a bug, then a fix is needed).

For testing, I assumed we might need to increase the code coverage in case we are not confident about a feature or a part of the code that will be released. Does it make sense?

Anyway, I'd not be too strict since the goal is to get a lean process.

Reviewer: Perhaps adopt an approach similar to "vulnerability management"? ... and decide if it's worth the trouble now or do later without adding too many procedures either.

"Severe bugs that affect stability, safety, performance or feature bugs critical to libs core functionality can be merged on ..."

Author: done

### Thaw

Once maintainers are trustful that the release candidate is in good shape, or after ~5 days from the code freeze, we enter the Thaw phase. 

From a technical perspective, this means that now the `master` and release branches diverge. 

Now, the release branch is git tagged with the targeted version.

From this point on:
- Only bug fix PRs are allowed to be merged in the release branch 
   - if any, the version patch number must be bumped  to git tag the release branch again.
- All kinds of PRs are allowed to be merged in the `master` branch again.

## Exceptions

Exceptions are allowed for compelling reasons. Notably:

- During the code freeze phase, PRs to complete or disable features in the code may be exceptionally merged
- Hotfixes releases can happen anytime and without following the full process. In such cases, patches are merged into the relevant release branch (or a release branch is created if needed), then a new version is git tagged, and the hotfix is directly released.

Exceptions to the [versioning rules](#versioning) are never allowed.

## Versioning

> ### Drivers versioning

Reviewer: Falco prints this version. `Default driver` equates to `Driver version` right?

```
./falco --version

Falco version: XXX
Libs version:  XXX
Plugin API:    1.0.0
Driver:
  API version:    2.0.0
  Schema version: 2.0.0
  Default driver: 2.0.0+driver
```
Would below or something similar perhaps be clearer @leogr ?

```
./falco --version

Falco version: XXX
Libs version:  XXX
Plugin API version: 1.0.0
Driver version: 2.0.0+driver
Driver internal API version: 2.0.0
Driver internal schema version: 2.0.0
```

Author: Anyway, `Default driver` is not the driver version. The default driver version is just the version that `falco-driver-loader` (shipped together with Falco) will install by default.

In reality, Falco will be compatible with a range of drivers. And the compatibility check only uses API and schema versions.

Perhaps we should write "shipped with driver version: 2.0.0+driver" or something similar? 

cc @falcosecurity/falco-maintainers

Reviewer: Hah that is actually a nice explanation, could you find a nice place (probably more in the Falco repo) to explain this exactly this way? Given this new info consider the suggestion invalidated.

> > _Note that `API_VERSION` and `SCHEMA_VERSION` are only used internally. On the other hand, only the **driver version number** will be used **to tag a new release**._

Reviewer: For (newer) devs a bit more clarity on why both `API_VERSION` and `SCHEMA_VERSION` are needed and what the exact distinction is would be nice (if possible), https://github.com/falcosecurity/libs/blob/master/driver/README.VERSION.md. Schema version is more intuitive to me, but for some PRs I wouldn't be too sure what has to be bumped how.

> ### Libs versioning

Reviewer: While it is part of the Falco repo demystifying https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/blob/master/userspace/engine/falco_engine_version.h#L19 here would be amazing or linking to a respective doc in the falco repo works as well.

```
FALCO_ENGINE_VERSION
FALCO_FIELDS_CHECKSUM
```

How does this relate to the driver or libs versioning?

Author: FALCO_ENGINE_VERSION does not directly link to the driver version. When an event field is introduced,  SCHEMA_VERSION and FALCO_ENGINE_VERSION need to be bumped.

Nevertheless, FALCO_ENGINE_VERSION can also be bumped for other reasons, like breaking changes introduced in the Falco engine that are not necessarily tied to the drivers or the libs.

Unfortunately, we can't easily change how FALCO_ENGINE_VERSION works since we know it is used in many rules files. But it's another topic. Would we open an issue in the Falco repo? Maybe a bit of documentation there will help.

Reviewer: https://github.com/falcosecurity/falco/issues/2195
